# Bellabeat
**Data Analysis Case Study**: How Can Bellabeat Play It Smart?

20.04.2022 (DD.MM.YYYY)
Find also on Kaggle https://www.kaggle.com/code/ikechukwuchilaka/case-study-bellabeat-using-python-and-tableau

**Overview**

Founded in 2013, Bellabeat is a high-tech manufacturer of health-focused products for women, with potential for growth in the global smart device market. I will focus on one of Bellabeat’s products and analyze smart device data to gain insight into how consumers are using their smart devices. The insights we discover will then help guide the marketing strategy for the company.

**1. ASK**

**Business Task**

Discover and analyze trends in smart device usage to gain insight and help guide the marketing strategy for Bellabeat to grow as a global player.

**Key Business Question**

How can these insights drive business decisions? 

The analysis of the data provided will reveal customer segments according to how they interact with the device and segment-targeted recommendations based on their needs.

**Key Stakeholders**

Urška Sršen: Bellabeat’s co-founder and Chief Creative Officer 

Sando Mur: Mathematician and Bellabeat’s cofounder; a key member of the Bellabeat executive team 

Bellabeat marketing analytics team

Bellabeat users (external stakeholders)

**2. PREPARE**

**Data Source Description**

The data used is public data that explores smart device users’ daily habits. The specific dataset is FitBit Fitness Tracker Data made available through Mobius, a friendly Kaggle member. This dataset was generated by thirty eligible respondents to a distributed survey via Amazon Mechanical Turk from 12th of March 2016 to 12th of May 2016. The data collected includes physical activity recorded in minutes, heart rate, sleep monitoring, daily activity, and steps.

**Data Location**: https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/arashnic/fitbit

**Data Organization**: data was supplied as 18 zipped CSV files. The latest modification on all the files was on 16th December 2020. Data was captured as long data

**ROCCC of Data:** Dataset was downloaded and files extracted. Altogether, the dataset is not ROCCC and it is not recommended for producing business recommendations.
Data is not original because it is third-party collected, 
it is also not current because it is from five years ago,
The sample size is also small and therefore unreliable.
Data cites the survey conducted by Amazon Mechanical Turk, which is a crowdsourcing website used to collect data from participants

**Data’s Relevance to the Problem**: analysis of the datasets below should provide insights 

dailyActivity(renamed daily_activity): this contains aggregated data from other datasets such as calorie and daily steps taken

sleepDay (renamed daily_sleep)

weightLogInfo (renamed weight_log_info)

**Problems with the Data:**  

Sample size issue (small)

Possible bias as data was only collected from ‘eligible’ users. The criteria for eligibility were not given

Sufficient metadata was not provided to better understand the attributes

**Actions**

**Data Preparation**: CSV files were downloaded, renamed as per standard naming conventions, and stored, in a folder on my system called Bellabeat

**3. PROCESS**

**Tools**:  

Python for data cleaning, transformation: I decided to use a scripting tool that I like

Tableau for visualization: I chose an easy-to-use visualization platform. Also, it gives me another opportunity to play around with its features.

**Cleaning, Manipulation, Transformation**:

I will explore the data, and look for irregularities such as outliers, null values, and so on. Transform the data so it is ready for analysis and document the cleaning process

**4. ANALYSE**

**Statistical findings**

Interpret the statistical report from the datasets

Find the link to the Python script for stages 3 and 4 https://colab.research.google.com/drive/1UBGSPJrE6eOgUCQ8CzwAuQeMw2_PIMJ6?usp=sharing

**5. SHARE**

In this step, I will create visualizations to communicate the findings from my analysis.

**5.1 Daily Logs Frequency**

Logs  were  highest in midweek: Wednesdays & Thursday but decreased during the weekend; from Friday to Sunday, and even Monday

**5.2 Average Very Active Minutes**

Users spent more time being very active on Tuesdays and then Mondays

**5.3 Average Steps Daily (Calories)**

We can see that the most calories were burnt on Tuesdays when the highest number of steps were taken. However, Saturday and Monday which followed in the number of steps taken did not record high calories burn as Wednesday and Thursday. There is no sufficient data to probe, this could be a result of diet or other activities

**5.4 Calories Burnt Per Step**
The article How Trackers Can Sabotage Weight Loss The article tells us that:

Fewer than 1,000 steps a day, are sedentary.

1,000 to 10,000 steps or about 4 miles a day is Lightly Active.

10,000 to 23,000 steps or 4 to 10 miles a day is considered Active.

More than 23,000 steps or 10 miles a day is Highly active.

From the scatter plot, we can observe that:

Much of the distance covered was indeed light active distance
Calories burnt and steps taken increased uniformly until about >15,000 steps. This would most likely be a result of fewer logs in that distance range (i.e above 15,000 steps), which is therefore insufficient to add to the inferences from this plot.

Outliers were found: 

Zero steps minimal calories burned. Again, calorie burn may be a result of other factors. Trackers can record calorie burns due to diet changes too.

One observation of > 35,000 steps with < 3,000 calories burned. This could be natural or due to user error or data collection errors.

**5.5 Calories Burnt Per Hour**
 
 The total steps taken have been used to size the data points. Larger rings indicate a higher step count. We can see that although the users spent long hours, many of them took few steps (sedentary). These points have been colored red.

**5.6 Calories-Sleep Relationship**

An adult female should have sleep time of 7 hours or more [CDC - Sleep and Sleep Disorders]

Out of the 24 users who logged sleep activity, we can see that most had an average of 5-9 hours of sleep. We have outliers (<3, and 11 hours of sleep)

From the scatter plot, we can not establish a relationship between sleep and calories. The sample size also is not adequate.

**5.7 Distance(%)-Minute_Active(%) Relationship**

The packed bubbles reveal the following:

Users used the Fitbit tracker to log sedentary step counts (>80% of the total time log) - This could mean slow steps taken daily as opposed to running, therefore they covered fewer kilometers. We can note that sedentary distance is the least (<1%).

Users generally spent the least time taking very active step counts (2%) or fairly active step counts (1%)

Much of the distance covered (62%) was with lightly active steps (1,000 to 10,000), and the time spent on these steps was just 17% of the total time recorded.

Find the link to Tableau visualizations https://public.tableau.com/views/FitBitUsersInsights/BellabeatFitnessTrackerUsage?:language=en-US&:display_count=n&:origin=viz_share_link

**6. ACT**

I will revisit the business task and see how my findings best address it.

**Business Task**

Discover and analyze trends in smart device usage to gain insight and help guide the marketing strategy for Bellabeat to grow as a global player.

**6.1 Trend Highlights**

The average number of steps recorded for the period was below advised range. The analysis shows that the users tracked their sedentary activities the most and not fitness exercises OR users do not exercise enough.

Users record their activities more during weekdays than on weekends

**6.2 Recommendations**

**Customer Education**: 

The users have to be educated on the purpose of the fitness tracker which is to encourage healthy lifestyle habit like exercising. 

**Ads/Messaging**

Push notifications can be used to remind the users to exercise on the weekends

Ads on calories consumption and other healthy lifestyle benefits can also be used to motivate the users periodically

Reward programs such as an incentive for >10,000 steps taken daily could go a long way in motivating the users

**THANK YOU**
